Hosting models/render modes & What's New 8.0 (#30279)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/hosting-models.md

-->

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

This article explains Blazor hosting models, which can be applied in different parts of a Blazor app at either compile time or runtime.

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

This article explains Blazor hosting models and how to choose which one to use.

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor is a web framework for building web UI components ([Razor components](xref:blazor/components/index)) that can be hosted in different ways:

* Server-side in ASP.NET Core (*Blazor Server* or statically rendered).
* Client-side in the browser on a [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)-based .NET runtime (*Blazor WebAssembly*).
* Blazor Hybrid to build native client apps.

> You can also host Razor components in native mobile and desktop apps that render to an embedded Web View control (*Blazor Hybrid*). Regardless of the hosting model, the way you build Razor components *is the same*. The same Razor components can be used with any of the hosting models unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of the hosting model, the way you build Razor components *is the same*. The same Razor components can be used with any of the hosting models unchanged.
```

> * Blazor Hybrid to build native client apps.
> 
> You can also host Razor components in native mobile and desktop apps that render to an embedded Web View control (*Blazor Hybrid*). Regardless of the hosting model, the way you build Razor components *is the same*. The same Razor components can be used with any of the hosting models unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Client-side in a native mobile or desktop app that renders components to an embedded Web View control (*Blazor Hybrid*).

Regardless of the hosting model, the way you build Razor components *is the same*. The same Razor components can be used with any of the hosting models unchanged.
```

-->

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

This article explains Blazor hosting models, which can be applied in different parts of a Blazor app at either compile time or runtime.

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

This article explains Blazor hosting models and how to choose which one to use.

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor is a web framework for building web UI components ([Razor components](xref:blazor/components/index)) that can be hosted in different ways:

> * Server-side in ASP.NET Core (*Blazor Server*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Server-side in ASP.NET Core (*Blazor Server* or statically rendered).
```

> * Client-side in the browser on a [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)-based .NET runtime (*Blazor WebAssembly*, *Blazor WASM*).

Reviewer: I know that people say Blazor WASM informally a lot, but for the docs and official messaging I prefer to stick with the full name Blazor WebAssembly.

```suggestion
* Client-side in the browser on a [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)-based .NET runtime (*Blazor WebAssembly*).
```

> * Determined at runtime, starting with server-side (*Blazor Server*) and switching over to client-side (*Blazor WebAssembly*) after the components, their dependencies, and the .NET runtime are downloaded to the browser.

Reviewer: Hmm...I don't think I would include this one in the hosting model list. This is really about changing how a component is rendered at runtime, which I assume is covered in detail in the render modes doc.

> [!NOTE]

> > For web-based Blazor apps, a component's hosting model is set by its *render mode*, which is described with examples in <xref:blazor/fundamentals/render-modes>. We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it, as it relies on an understanding of broader Blazor concepts.

Reviewer: > We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it, as it relies on an understanding of broader Blazor concepts.

This seems pretty awkward to have to repeat everywhere. I think we should just remove this advisory. Most of our doc articles require some sort of prior knowledge to fully understand them.

> You can also host Razor components in native mobile and desktop apps that render to an embedded Web View control (*Blazor Hybrid*). Regardless of the hosting model, the way you build Razor components *is the same*. The same Razor components can be used with any of the hosting models unchanged.

Reviewer: It seems like Blazor Hybrid should be covered alongside the other hosting models listed above in the bulleted list.

## Blazor WebAssembly

The Blazor WebAssembly hosting model runs components client-side in the browser on a WebAssembly-based .NET runtime. Razor components, their dependencies, and the .NET runtime are downloaded to the browser. Components are executed directly on the browser UI thread. UI updates and event handling occur within the same process. Assets are deployed as static files to a web server or service capable of serving static content to clients.

![Blazor WebAssembly: Blazor runs on a UI thread inside the browser.](~/blazor/hosting-models/_static/blazor-webassembly.png)

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor web apps can use the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model to enable client-side interactivity. When an app is created that exclusively runs on the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model without server-side rendering and interactivity, the app is called a *standalone* Blazor WebAssembly app.

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

When the Blazor WebAssembly app is created for deployment without a backend ASP.NET Core app to serve its files, the app is called a *standalone* Blazor WebAssembly app.

> When a standalone Blazor WebAssembly app uses a backend ASP.NET Core app to serve its files, the app is called a *hosted* Blazor WebAssembly app. Using hosted Blazor WebAssembly, you get a full-stack web development experience with .NET, including the ability to share code between the client and server apps, support for prerendering, and integration with MVC and Razor Pages. A hosted client app can interact with its backend server app over the network using a variety of messaging frameworks and protocols, such as [web API](xref:web-api/index), [gRPC-web](xref:grpc/index), and [SignalR](xref:signalr/introduction) (<xref:blazor/tutorials/signalr-blazor>).

Reviewer: Let's keep this section in the .NET 8 docs. Even though we removed the template option to create new hosted Blazor WebAssembly apps, we still support hosted Blazor WebAssembly apps in .NET 8. For example, you can upgrade an existing hosted Blazor WebAssembly app to .NET 8 without any further changes.

* .NET Core on the server is used to run the app, so existing .NET tooling, such as debugging, works as expected.
* Thin clients are supported. For example, Blazor Server works with browsers that don't support WebAssembly and on resource-constrained devices.
* The app's .NET/C# code base, including the app's component code, isn't served to clients.

The Blazor Server hosting model has the following limitations:

* Higher latency usually exists. Every user interaction involves a network hop.
* There's no offline support. If the client connection fails, interactivity fails.
* Scaling apps with many users requires server resources to handle multiple client connections and client state.
* An ASP.NET Core server is required to serve the app. Serverless deployment scenarios aren't possible, such as serving the app from a Content Delivery Network (CDN).

We recommend using the [Azure SignalR Service](/azure/azure-signalr) for apps that adopt the Blazor Server hosting model. The service allows for scaling up a Blazor Server app to a large number of concurrent SignalR connections.

## Blazor WebAssembly

> Blazor WebAssembly (WASM) runs client-side in the browser on a WebAssembly-based .NET runtime. Razor components, their dependencies, and the .NET runtime are downloaded to the browser. Components are executed directly on the browser UI thread. UI updates and event handling occur within the same process. Assets are deployed as static files to a web server or service capable of serving static content to clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Blazor WebAssembly hosting model runs components client-side in the browser on a WebAssembly-based .NET runtime. Razor components, their dependencies, and the .NET runtime are downloaded to the browser. Components are executed directly on the browser UI thread. UI updates and event handling occur within the same process. Assets are deployed as static files to a web server or service capable of serving static content to clients.
```

> Blazor WebAssembly (WASM) runs client-side in the browser on a WebAssembly-based .NET runtime. Razor components, their dependencies, and the .NET runtime are downloaded to the browser. Components are executed directly on the browser UI thread. UI updates and event handling occur within the same process. Assets are deployed as static files to a web server or service capable of serving static content to clients.

Reviewer: > Components are executed directly on the browser UI thread.

With the multithreading work there's some discussion about potentially changing this in a future release, so we should remember to update this bit if that eventually happens. The current text is accurate and fine for now.

![Blazor WebAssembly: Blazor runs on a UI thread inside the browser.](~/blazor/hosting-models/_static/blazor-webassembly.png)

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> When an app is created that exclusively runs on the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model without server-side rendering and interactivity, the app is called a *standalone* or *static* Blazor WebAssembly app.
> 
> An app created with WebAssembly-hosted components in addition to server-hosted components is a *Blazor Web App* with client-side interactivity. Guidance on setting the *render mode* to determine a component's hosting model is provided in <xref:blazor/fundamentals/render-modes>. We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it.

Reviewer: In .NET 8, everything

```suggestion
Blazor web apps can use the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model to enable client-side interactivity. When an app is created that exclusively runs on the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model without server-side rendering and interactivity, the app is called a *standalone* Blazor WebAssembly app. Guidance on setting the *render mode* to determine a component's hosting model is provided in <xref:blazor/fundamentals/render-modes>. We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it.
```

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

> When the Blazor WebAssembly app is created for deployment without a backend ASP.NET Core app to serve its files, the app is called a *standalone* or *static* Blazor WebAssembly app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Blazor WebAssembly app is created for deployment without a backend ASP.NET Core app to serve its files, the app is called a *standalone* Blazor WebAssembly app.
```

> When the app is created for deployment with a backend app to serve its files, the app is called a *hosted* Blazor WebAssembly app. Using hosted Blazor WebAssembly, you get a full-stack web development experience with .NET, including the ability to share code between the client and server apps, support for prerendering, and integration with MVC and Razor Pages. A hosted client app can interact with its backend server app over the network using a variety of messaging frameworks and protocols, such as [web API](xref:web-api/index), [gRPC-web](xref:grpc/index), and [SignalR](xref:signalr/introduction) (<xref:blazor/tutorials/signalr-blazor>).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a standalone Blazor WebAssembly app uses a backend ASP.NET Core app to serve its files, the app is called a *hosted* Blazor WebAssembly app. Using hosted Blazor WebAssembly, you get a full-stack web development experience with .NET, including the ability to share code between the client and server apps, support for prerendering, and integration with MVC and Razor Pages. A hosted client app can interact with its backend server app over the network using a variety of messaging frameworks and protocols, such as [web API](xref:web-api/index), [gRPC-web](xref:grpc/index), and [SignalR](xref:signalr/introduction) (<xref:blazor/tutorials/signalr-blazor>).
```

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-6.0"

A Blazor WebAssembly app built as a [Progressive Web App (PWA)](xref:blazor/progressive-web-app) uses modern browser APIs to enable many of the capabilities of a native client app, such as working offline, running in its own app window, launching from the host's operating system, receiving push notifications, and automatically updating in the background.

:::moniker-end

The Blazor script handles:

* Downloading the .NET runtime, Razor components, and the component's dependencies.
* Initialization of the runtime.

The Blazor WebAssembly hosting model offers several benefits:

> * For static Blazor WebAssembly apps, there's no .NET server-side dependency after the app is downloaded from the server, so the app remains functional if the server goes offline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps, there's no .NET server-side dependency after the app is downloaded from the server, so the app remains functional if the server goes offline.
```

* Client resources and capabilities are fully leveraged.
* Work is offloaded from the server to the client.

> * For static Blazor WebAssembly apps, an ASP.NET Core web server isn't required to host the app. Serverless deployment scenarios are possible, such as serving the app from a Content Delivery Network (CDN).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps, an ASP.NET Core web server isn't required to host the app. Serverless deployment scenarios are possible, such as serving the app from a Content Delivery Network (CDN).
```

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-6.0"

> Static Blazor WebAssembly apps support ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation, where you can compile your .NET code directly into WebAssembly. AOT compilation results in runtime performance improvements at the expense of a larger app size. For more information, see <xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation>. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly apps support ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation, where you can compile your .NET code directly into WebAssembly. AOT compilation results in runtime performance improvements at the expense of a larger app size. For more information, see <xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation>. 
```

> The same [.NET WebAssembly build tools](xref:blazor/tooling#net-webassembly-build-tools) used for AOT compilation also [relink the .NET WebAssembly runtime](xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#runtime-relinking) to trim unused runtime code. Static Blazor also trims unused code from .NET Core framework libraries. The .NET compiler further precompresses a static Blazor WebAssembly app for a smaller app payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same [.NET WebAssembly build tools](xref:blazor/tooling#net-webassembly-build-tools) used for AOT compilation also [relink the .NET WebAssembly runtime](xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#runtime-relinking) to trim unused runtime code. Blazor also trims unused code from .NET Core framework libraries. The .NET compiler further precompresses a static Blazor WebAssembly app for a smaller app payload.
```

## Which Blazor hosting model should I choose?

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> A component's hosting model is set by its *render mode*, either at compile time or runtime, which is described with examples in <xref:blazor/fundamentals/render-modes>. We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it. The following table shows the primary considerations for setting the render mode to determine a component's hosting model. For static Blazor WebAssembly apps, all of the app's components are rendered on the client with the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A component's hosting model is set by its *render mode*, either at compile time or runtime, which is described with examples in <xref:blazor/fundamentals/render-modes>. We recommend waiting to read the *Render modes* article until after you've read the articles leading up to it. The following table shows the primary considerations for setting the render mode to determine a component's hosting model. For standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps, all of the app's components are rendered on the client with the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model.
```

Author: I'll sweep the whole doc set for this change before merging this.

### Complete .NET API compatibility

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model and Blazor Hybrid apps have complete .NET API compatibility, while components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model and static Blazor WebAssembly apps are limited to a subset of .NET APIs. When an app's specification requires one or more .NET APIs that are unavailable to WebAssembly-rendered components, then choose to render components for Blazor Server or use Blazor Hybrid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model and Blazor Hybrid apps have complete .NET API compatibility, while components rendered for Blazor WebAssembly are limited to a subset of .NET APIs. When an app's specification requires one or more .NET APIs that are unavailable to WebAssembly-rendered components, then choose to render components for Blazor Server or use Blazor Hybrid.
```

### Direct access to server and network resources

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model have direct access to server and network resources where the app is executing. Because components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, static Blazor WebAssembly apps, and Blazor Hybrid apps execute on a client, they don't have direct access to server and network resources. Components can access server and network resources *indirectly* via protected server-based APIs. Server-based APIs might be available via third-party libraries, packages, and services. Take into account the following considerations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model have direct access to server and network resources where the app is executing. Because components hosted using Blazor WebAssembly or Blazor Hybrid execute on a client, they don't have direct access to server and network resources. Components can access server and network resources *indirectly* via protected server-based APIs. Server-based APIs might be available via third-party libraries, packages, and services. Take into account the following considerations:
```

* Third-party libraries, packages, and services might be costly to implement and maintain, weakly supported, or introduce security risks.
* If one or more server-based APIs are developed internally by your organization, additional resources are required to build and maintain them.

> To avoid server-based APIs for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model or Blazor Hybrid apps, render components for the Blazor Server hosting model, which can access server and network resources directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the Blazor Server hosting model to avoid the need to expose APIs from the server environment.
```

### Small payload size with fast initial load time

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model have relatively small payload sizes with faster initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, use the Blazor Server hosting model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rendering components from the server reduces the app payload size and improves initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, use the Blazor Server hosting model or consider static server rendering.
```

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor Server apps have relatively small payload sizes with faster initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, adopt Blazor Server.

:::moniker-end

### Near native execution speed

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor Hybrid apps run using the .NET runtime natively on the target platform, which offers the best possible speed.

> Components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, including Progressive Web Apps (PWAs), and standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps run using the .NET runtime for WebAssembly, which is slower than running directly on the platform, even for standalone apps that are [ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled](xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation) for WebAssembly in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, including Progressive Web Apps (PWAs), and standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps run using the .NET runtime for WebAssembly, which is slower than running directly on the platform. Consider using [ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled](xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation) to improve runtime performance when using Blazor WebAssembly.
```

### Small payload size with fast initial load time

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model have relatively small payload sizes with faster initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, adopt rendering for the Blazor Server hosting model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model have relatively small payload sizes with faster initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, use the Blazor Server hosting model.
```

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-8.0"

Blazor Server apps have relatively small payload sizes with faster initial load times. When a fast initial load time is desired, adopt Blazor Server.

:::moniker-end

### Near native execution speed

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model generally execute on the server quickly. However, the components are usually slower than other types of apps that execute code natively on the client.

Reviewer: Hmm, this statement about server vs client execution seems incorrect. Often components run faster on the server because the server hardware is more powerful than the client hardware.

In general .NET runtime execution is highly optimized for both server and client platforms. It's on the web platform (browsers) that we have challenges. .NET runtime execution in browsers is much faster in .NET 8 thanks to the new partial JIT support in the interpreter and AOT helps further, but it's still slower than when running .NET on other platforms and generally slower than the equivalent JavaScript code.

Author: I didn't write this, and I don't recall if the original intent had anything to do with server load or network latency, which would make this statement make more sense I think. Whatever the case, I'm not sure if these remarks are of much value here. Should they be stricken 🔪?

Reviewer: I think we want to revise this "Near native execution speed" section to basically say that Blazor Server and Blazor Hybrid are fast. Blazor WebAssembly is not as fast but can be made faster using AOT compilation.

Author: I'll work on this further in the morning. Thus far, I just removed the first paragraph. It seems like the two paragraphs that remain are close to your suggestion.

:::moniker range="< aspnetcore-6.0"

> Blazor Server apps generally execute on the server quickly. However, Blazor Server apps are usually slower than other types of apps that execute natively on the client.

Reviewer: See my related comment above.

Blazor WebAssembly apps run using the .NET runtime for WebAssembly, which is slower than running directly on the platform.

:::moniker-end

### App code secure and private on the server

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Maintaining app code securely and privately on the server is a built-in feature of components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model. Components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, static Blazor WebAssembly apps, and Blazor Hybrid apps can use server-based APIs to access functionality that must be kept private and secure. The considerations for developing and maintaining server-based APIs described in the [Direct access to server and network resources](#direct-access-to-server-and-network-resources) section apply. If the development and maintenance of server-based APIs isn't desirable for maintaining secure and private app code, render components for the Blazor Server hosting model.

Reviewer: > Components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, static Blazor WebAssembly apps, and Blazor Hybrid apps

This phrase is pretty tedious and is used in several places. Can we change it to "Components rendered using the Blazor WebAssembly and Blazor Hybrid hosting models..."?

### Run apps offline once downloaded

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> Static Blazor WebAssembly apps built as Progressive Web Apps (PWAs) and Blazor Hybrid apps can run offline, which is particularly useful when clients aren't able to connect to the Internet. Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model fail to run when the connection to the server is lost. If an app must run offline, static Blazor WebAssembly and Blazor Hybrid are the best choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps built as Progressive Web Apps (PWAs) and Blazor Hybrid apps can run offline, which is particularly useful when clients aren't able to connect to the Internet. Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model fail to run when the connection to the server is lost. If an app must run offline, static Blazor WebAssembly and Blazor Hybrid are the best choices.
```

### Static site hosting

> Static site hosting is possible with static Blazor WebAssembly apps because they're downloaded to clients as a set of static files. Static Blazor WebAssembly apps don't require a server to execute server-side code in order to download and run and can be delivered via a [Content Delivery Network (CDN)](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Glossary/CDN) (for example, [Azure CDN](https://azure.microsoft.com/services/cdn/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static site hosting is possible with standalone Blazor WebAssembly apps because they're downloaded to clients as a set of static files. Static Blazor WebAssembly apps don't require a server to execute server-side code in order to download and run and can be delivered via a [Content Delivery Network (CDN)](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Glossary/CDN) (for example, [Azure CDN](https://azure.microsoft.com/services/cdn/)).
```

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-6.0"

> Although Blazor Hybrid apps are compiled into one or more self-contained deployment assets, the assets are usually provided to clients through a third-party app store. If static hosting is an app requirement, select static Blazor WebAssembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Blazor Hybrid apps are compiled into one or more self-contained deployment assets, the assets are usually provided to clients through a third-party app store. If static hosting is an app requirement, select standalone Blazor WebAssembly.
```

:::moniker-end

### Offloads processing to clients

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-6.0 < aspnetcore-8.0"

> Components rendered for the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model, static Blazor WebAssembly apps, and Blazor Hybrid apps execute on clients and thus offload processing to clients. Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model execute on a server, so server resource demand typically increases with the number of users and the amount of processing required per user. When it's possible to offload most or all of an app's processing to clients and the app processes a significant amount of data, Blazor WebAssembly or Blazor Hybrid is the best choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components rendered using the Blazor WebAssembly and Blazor Hybrid hosting models execute on clients and thus offload processing to clients. Components rendered for the Blazor Server hosting model execute on a server, so server resource demand typically increases with the number of users and the amount of processing required per user. When it's possible to offload most or all of an app's processing to clients and the app processes a significant amount of data, Blazor WebAssembly or Blazor Hybrid is the best choice.
```

### Web-based deployment

> Apps that use either the Blazor Server or Blazor WebAssembly hosting model are deployed as web apps that are updated on the next app refresh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor web apps are updated on the next app refresh from the browser.
```

Author: Modified it to caps for "Blazor Web Apps," as the name is a proper noun matching a project template name.

Reviewer: I don't think we actually want to use the proper noun here. Not all Blazor web apps are created using the Blazor Web App template. For example, older Blazor Server and Blazor Web Assembly apps.
